our surgeon working with the aid agency
Doctors Without Borders inside the AL AA
Hospital in Northern Gaza has been
injured in gunfire from outside the
facility let's speak now to Leo can head
of the Doctors Without Borders Mission
he joins us live now uh from occupied
East Jerusalem thanks very much uh for
being with us so um tell us more about
what happened here as as as far as what
you've
heard uh I think you know that the
situation in ALA hospital is
catastrophic uh it's really Under Siege
since uh several days now um uh it's
very difficult to get uh information
from what is going on inside the
hospital because of the Comm
communication issues that we know since
the beginning of the world which is a
real challenge for us to coordinate
operation but as well for the for the
for the ambulances and all the the
services to to to uh give help to the
people it's a real challenge a lack of
communication what we know from now is
like one of our surgeon yes has been
injur the last information I got is that
critical situation he's doing okay but
we are waiting to really be able to talk
to him and have more direct information
but we are of course outraging outrage
but what is going on in ALA right now uh
it's a bit the same scenario of what
happened in shifa hospital that is
repeating again and again in the
different hospitals uh you mentioned
that the the surgeon um involved uh who
was who was injured from the gun is is
is doing okay I'm wondering are you able
to talk a little bit more about the
extent of his injuries and and his his
prospects for
Recovery no not yet I think it's a light
in from n so we have all the hope that
he will be okay and we hope it's it
should be the case and he should be even
maybe able to to to work again and and
operate patients so it's a it's a I'm
sorry I cannot tell you more right now
but I told you it's extremely
challenging situation for us to to reach
out to the people and just to stress
that the fact for us it's very difficult
to work in this context because our own
staff our own colleagues they are in a
in a in a survival mode all of them so
it's very difficult to help people when
when even yourself you are in a in a in
in such distressful
situation absolutely I mean when when
when your own security is is in danger
it's it's hard to even just focus on on
the job that they're doing there as
difficult as it is but I was wondering
if you could talk about
um the general beyond beyond the the the
security uh challenges and and just as
you say being able to survive what sort
of conditions uh medical conditions are
they working under there in terms of um
the the supplies that they have the
medicine and so on because the picture
we're getting from hospitals throughout
the Gaza Strip is they are desperately
uh short of of of so many basic things
is that is that what you're hearing as
well absolutely absolutely and is the
case in every Hospital of course the
hospital in the north it's even worse
but you know since the beginning of the
war there have been a systematic
targeting of the Whole Health System not
only hospitals but the health system as
a whole has been targeted and it's
completely collapsed in the north there
is no more functioning Health System
even the hospitals that are still uh
open they working and maybe two three
four five% of their capacity we cannot
call them like really hospitals they are
they are not at all and in the South it
is collapsing we have surgeons working
in in Alexa in NASA hospital and in
European General Hospital as well in
Rafa and and and the same story all over
the place they are Laing everything a
lot of Childrens are arriving with a
with a very bad injuries that they
cannot operate in one go so they have to
do multiple operation but then there is
no more beds because the infrastructure
for the for the of the health system is
not made for that many people it's not
made for that many wounded patients so
just the beds is a good example we are
operating people on the floor it's
totally inhuman it's totally
unacceptable um when we operate someone
there is nowhere to put him afterward so
we have to discharge patients which
which in normal cases we will never
discharge them uh one
colleague msf doctor he told me few days
ago that he had several patients with
warms so leaving worms inside the wounds
because this patient was coming from the
north it had no change of the dressing
for several days and the the wounds were
infected we have 60% of the patients
with infected wounds and some of them to
the extent that there were worms inside
the the the the wounds uh our surgeon
you know we have international also
surgeon coming to to work in in a in
Gaza he told me uh he stated directly
that right now the host
it's like the World War I situation it's
the same standard so to give you a
picture in two months we pass from a
relatively good health system with very
uh good doctors and very high educated
surgeons and doctors they are now
operating in a setting that is the same
as in World War I yeah it's certainly a
very Bleak and desperate picture that
you that you paint there um and I I I
have to ask you with with so much of
this going on uh around in inside these
hospitals for your colleagues where
where do they find the strength to to to
carry on and to continue to do their
jobs honestly I don't know and I have to
say I am impressed we are all so much
impressed by by how much dedicated they
are uh we lost people msf staff but
there are
also health workers who died during this
war it's just uh incredible and I don't
know where honestly it's a good question
and it's like it's like it's incredible
what they doing I'm just afraid that
they are doing this they take a lot on
themselves and when it will be all all
over they will still have a like a lot
of traumatic events that they are going
through right now right now they have
maybe the power to do it because they in
the spur of the moment but the violence
of what they are leaving is incredible
and for doctors for example to
operate a child without a uh
anesthesia it's it's it's a trauma that
they will they will keep with them for
the rest of their life so it's a it's a
it's it's terrible at the same time uh
what they are enduring another story I
want to tell you that we got from a
psychologist working in hospital he told
us that he was talking with the five
years old uh boy that had Suicidal
Thoughts five years old
boy thinking about committing SU side
because he was such in such pain and and
such
suffering uh because of lack of medicine
and the the psychological distress of
losing his family that he was talking
about societal things so it gives you an
idea about how difficult it is for for
those healthcare workers that put their
life in danger but also for their mental
health it's extremely challenge yeah it
certainly is a unbelievably difficult
situation that uh your colleagues are
facing there we appreciate you talking
to us about all of this and and we wish
them the best and thanks very much for
your time Leo k